### DevOps Best Practices

Separating code from site-specific configuration

Ansible itself is all about configuration as code.

While developing flexible code, you should separate site-specific information from the code, which should be static.

You need to try to maintain a certain obstruction level in code and to keep out very specific information.

Developing dynamic code allows you to use your code on any site.

To provide site-specific code, variables can be used.

Apart from variables, ansible provides facts.

Facts are system properties that are dynamically discovered and can be used as variables.

Fact is a variable, the only difference is that variables in general are defined by the system administrator and ansible facts are discovered on the managed machines

Separating sire-specific information from static code is also referred to as decoupling.


### Using variables in a playbook

Variables can be defined in different ways.

You can set them in playbooks directly, but that is bad practice as the site-specific information in that case is not separated from the code.

While referring to a variable, you need to use double braces:

 - the variable is {{ myvariable }}

If a value starts with a variable, the variable needs to be between double quotes and double curly braces:

 - msg: "{{ myvariable }} is set"
 
If used in a when statement the curly braces are omitted.

vim variables_example.yaml
---
- name: create a user using a variable
  hosts: rocky
  vars:
    user: lisa
  tasks:
    - name: create a user {{ user }} on host {{ ansible_hostname }}
        user:
	  name: "{{ user }}"

Variables are integrated in play header.

Header is the highest level in the playbook where you can set your variables.

It also means that if you have a multiple play playbook you need a different approach to set your variables accordingly.

ansible_hostname is also noted as a variable - this is an ansible fact.

Facts are discovered variables.

When value is starting with the variable or the entire value is just the variable. The entire value must be between double quotes.

So mind your syntax

Another way of defining variable
This way we overwriting the variable on the command line
That goes for any option that you use in ansible.
If we define the option on the command line, it has higher precedence and it'll always win

The golden rule in ansible - the most specific settings will always win 

ansible-playbook playbook.yaml -e user=bob


############################

Defining Variables

There are different ways to define variables:
 - in the play header using vars:
 - in the play header using an include with vars_files:
 - Using the set_fact module in a play
 - On the command line, using the -e key=value option
 - as inventory variables
 - as host or host_group variables
 - Using vars_prompt: to request values from the user while running the playbook
 
Ansible facts are disccovered variables containing system properties

Ansible Vault can be used to encrypt sensitive values like variables


So with all these different ways of running variables we need 
to have a clear idea of when to do what


Defining variables in play

To define variables in plays, include a vars: section in the header of the play where the variables are needed

Variables defined in plays are valid only within that specific play, and don't have a playbook scope

Use vars_files: to specify a list of files that include variables you want to include

To override variables specified in this way, use the -e key=value command line option to specify variables

vim vars_file.yaml
---
- name: using a variable include file
  hosts: rocky
  gather_facts: no
  vars_files: myvars.yaml
  tasks:
  - name: install package {{ mypackage }}
    yum:
	  name: "{{ mypackage }}"
	  state: latest


vim myvars.yaml

mypackage: nmap
myftpservice: vsftpd
myfileservice: smb

Variable are defined in a key : value style
Also we can use any style in which you use key=value

Using set_fact

set_fact is a module that can be used anywhere in a play to set a variable
Variables set this way apply as a fact to the hosts on which it is set

Set_fact relates the variable to the host that you are using in a play. 

The benefit of set_fact is that it allows you to dynamically set variables that are based on the result of any task in the playbook

Also, variables set with set_fact have a playbook scope

Variables that are defined using set_fact apply to the host on which it is set. That means that htey do have a playbook scope but if in the next play you are using the same variable on a different host, it is not going to work.

vim set_fact.yaml
---
- name: set_fact_demo
  hosts: localhost
  tasks:
   - set_fact:
       myvar: myvalue
   - debug:
       msg: the value is {{ myvar }}
	   
- name: other play
  hosts: localhos
  tasks:
  - debug:
      msg: checking if set_fact is valid {{ myvar }}
	  
	  
set_fact is actually is a module and we can check in doc it's usage

Do mind the hosts on which you are running it.


Using vars_prompt

Use vars_prompt in a play header to prompt users for a variable value that will have a scope within that play.

By default, the variable is flagged as private, which means the user doesn't see anything while entering the variable

Use private: no in vars_prompt to change this behavior

You should be aware of the scope of variable. That is really something important to realize when working with variables.

vim vars_prompt.yaml
---
- name: vars_prompt demo
  hosts: localhost
  vars_prompt:
   - name: package
     prompt: which package do you want to install
	 private: no
  tasks:
  - debug:
      msg: the package is {{ package }}
	  
- name: additional play
  hosts: localhost
  tasks:
   - debug:
       msg: demonstrating scope of {{ package }}
	   

Using inventory and Host variables

Inventory and host variables are used to set a variable as a property gfor a specific host

To use host variables, create a file in a directory host_vars that has the name of the host


At some point in time it was considered deprecated to set variables in inventory, but with the rise of Ansible Tower it has become common again. Because in ansible Tower, in some cases, it's just the best way to define your variables in inventory

To define host group variables, create a file in a directory group_vars that has the name of a host groups.

In these files, define the host or host group variables

So if you use group_vars/all in the file all, you define your variables and thesse variables are automacally picked up

mkdir group_vars

vim group_vars/rocky
user: bob

vim create_user.yaml
---
- name: create users
  hosts: rocky
  tasks:
  - debug:
      msg: creating user {{ user }}

	  
##############################

Understanding ansible facts

ansible facts are system variables that contain information about the managed system

Each playbook starts with an implicit task to gather facts. Unless you specifically disable that

To use fact gathering from an ad-hoc command, use the setup module

Additional modules for fact gathering are available, like package_facts. These additional modules allow you to gather facts fro no matter which assets you are managing with ansible.

To disable fact gathering, use gather_facts: no in the play header


ansible hostname -m setup > facts.txt

Top level variable, one big variable - ansible_facts

Within that variable we have the second tier variables and these variables have their own value

Facts are categorized in different variables.


Nice thing about all this facts is that these facts are variables. And we can use these facts in conditionals




vim gather_facts.yaml
---
- name: show fact gathering
  hosts: all
  tasks:
  - name: show all facts
    debug:
	  var: ansible_facts
	  

Difference between setup module and gathering facts:

setup module - all tier two variables have ansible underscore in front of them.

In fact setup module is still compatible with the old approach, where the fact gathering is showing you the new approach.

Difference between old and new approach - before ansible 2.5 facts were not stored in one big variable ansbile_facts. They were hust stored in the variable ansible_all_ipv4_addresses.
Then in ansible 2.5 they decided to put everyting in one variable ansible_facts and to drop the name, the prefix ansible_

The setup module is still printing this prefix and if we use fact gathering we don't see that prefix.

And that prefix actually makes sense in the different ways, how you can refer to your variables and facts.
